Let's not look at a very important I know very interesting topic.
It's about losing eclipses debugger as the name suggests a debugger is a tool that aids in application
debugging.
That is if there is a bug which is nothing but a defect in your application then you would debug it
.
So if you see any defects in your application then you can run the debugger to investigate the issue
and then identify the exact problem area and then subsequently fix it.
The application will be run by more when you're running the debugger debugger is also useful in understanding
the program flow.
So if you're looking at some code that you are not familiar with then you can use a debugger to get
a good understanding of how the program works.
That's a really effective way to understand code written by someone else in this lesson we will learn
how to use a debugger effectively.
So let's get started now.
Good debugging application.
The first thing you would do is set one or more breakpoints a break point is the place with the debugger
with boss.
So when you start a debugger it would run the application on would stop at the first break point.
So a break point is essentially the point where you want to investigate the code.
So let's just go ahead and place on a breakpoint in the student test class.
So here we are in the Student class and we are iterating over all the students and printing the name
and gender.
So let's just go ahead and place our break for point here in line 35.
And all we need to do is just double click here.
And that's a break point.
Now if you want to remove it just double click again.
OK.
So let's just go ahead double quick here and to start the debugger all we need to do is press this button
over here ARE WE CAN DO IT RIGHT CLICK HERE answered run debug -- java application.
Now if you do run as to our application it would simply run the application without the debugger.
OK so let's just go here.
Press this button here.
Now what happened was earlier we were in Djala perspective now because we have started a debug session
it opened a debug perspective.
OK so we are here in the book Wisbech.
Sometimes this would invoke a pop up on you with a dialog and you would have to hit okay for that.
And if that happens or you can go ahead and do it.
OK.
So here we are in debug perspective.
And it shows different views here.
So this is the debug view here.
This is a debug view.
And here are sites variables view.
I will get back to that later.
And here is the editor.
And here is a concern as application is running we will see the output here.
So let's just go ahead and close this outline.
So the debugger has started on it has stopped at the first big point here.
So that's like totally fine.
And here within the debug view what this means is it's telling.
This is called It's a stack frame and it is telling that we are inside the main method at line 35 and
these are all the local variables of attend the main matter first.
I would like to talk about is about these three features here.
So let's just go and then this is called a step into step over step here.
And so let's just begin with this step over which has a shortcut of F 6 also and what it means is what
exactly the current line in the statement.
And it would more move to the next statement.
OK so let's just do that.
So as you can see we are at line 36 now and even here it has changed to 36.
Now let's look at the variables here.
So we just executed this here.
This line the statement in line 35 on its name.
And if you see a free highlighted here where here Howard the name variable we can see that it is the
name is initialized to John.
OK.
So this is a student and you can see the same output here also name value is Jo-Anne.
Now let's step over once again.
So we don't we have just executed the second statement and gender is male ungenerous male here so new
variable got created.
And here is a method right.
So if we want to investigate the matter what we can do is we can step into.
Which means that we are telling the debugger to step into that matter.
So let's just do that.
Now here we are in the first statement of the method and you can see that this has changed do you know
the main method the stack frame corresponding to main method of went down and then we have a new stack
frame corresponding to the numerator.
So it's here right now and we are at line 48.
And these are the variables corresponding to the numerator.
OK.
So let's just head step or.
And you can see that the output is also getting printed here.
The new output in the console let's it step on again and let's step or again.
So we will go back and the control comes here and then it goes with the next declaration.
So let's head control stapler.
This is the second student step over this time not just do a step or so the loop continues again and
it's good booze once again step over step or step over.
Let's do a step into here and one other thing I wanted to show you here as it's printing the name and
gender.
But you can see that it's also blending the student also so if you click on this student as here it's
the local variable of the for loop.
So if you click click here you can see the all the elements of the student object itself.
OK.
So you can see that ID's thousand three name is Anita.
So these are all the variables within the student.
So here variables would show both residue variables as well as object references.
Now let's go here step into.
Now let's look at step written step written words simply execute the methhead and it would take the
control back to the caller and it would move to the next statement after the after the Invoke in location
statement.
OK so let's just head this here now.
So the control came back here and it went to the next iteration.
OK.
So that's separate.
Now let's do one more time step or step or step or up do step or where.
Now here we are at the closing brace at this point it doesn't matter whether we step over or step breakdown
or step in.
So all three would work in the same way sort of just head step over.
And so since we have four students now when I hit a step or so control goes back here to set M..
So we don't how any other any any other big points we can search more than one break point.
And also one other thing is when we vent here around when we were in print method.
So if we had then we you know when we do step down here it was returning the control back to the calling
motard But if there was any other break point in between then it would stop at the big point.
OK so if there is no magic wand you would call the control would go back with a calling method.
OK.
Now let's go back to the matter let's just had this button.
So back to this matter.
Now if you do step or can just took over.
Now let's see if you're done with your investigation you can either stop here dominate.
You can terminate all you consider is you.
So you can resume the control would raise your hand.
It would stop at the next break point.
OK so let's just head this and we are done with the debugging session.
Now let's look at something interesting.
So let's just go up here.
The student won.
Let's get another break point here.
So here we are creating a student instance.
OK.
And this is the first Torent instance.
So we have two break points in our student test at line 13 on line five.
So let's just go ahead and head and de-bug once again.
So the debugger pauses here and let's So this is.
Here we are creating an instance.
So let's just go into this constructor here.
So let's step in do.
And here you see that it's loading this classic cordless classloader.
And even here here it says that in arts you can see the corresponding stack for him.
Let's get one more step in two and you'll see something else launcher Dark Glass string dark glass.
So what exactly is happening here.
So the thing that is happening is we are in walking we are creating the student instance for the very
first time.
And when that happens GBM first tries to load the Student class into the memory.
OK.
And that process is qualis glassblowing and we will see that in the GBM in dentals chapter.
So every time when we create a new instance every time as it classes access for the very first time
it has to be loaded into the memory.
And that's called class loading and that happens for the very first time.
Not for the second time.
So that's what is happening so when you see this all you can do is just click on separate and separate
and separate and separate.
So now we're back in the main matter and first instance has been created so let's just go to the second
instance.
Now let's head step into now as you can see it's no longer calling the class loading class.
The reason as class student is already in memory and JVM is simply using it to create the need to create
a new instance or an effect.
OK so what we saw happens only the very first time.
So that's the class drawing process.
So the first time it floats into the memory and from the second on time onwards it's just it just uses
the class from the memory.
Ok since it's already loaded into memory now we are here in this construct Let's head step over.
Now you'll see it's not going it's not executing the first statement but for some reason it's getting
here to the this statement where the gender variable and the student is getting initialized.
So what exactly is happening.
The thing is we know that within the constructor the first invocation statement would be a call to call
to the superclass constructor which is.
So we know that there is an super invocation statement.
So basically what happened was the object class got invoked under super invocation statement is an invisible
statement We know that.
And so that got in worked.
So the control window object it created an object instance and then it came back with a subclass which
is the student.
And then it started to initialize all these instance variables so that's what is happening here.
And we will examine it in more detail when we create the next instance so let's just head step over
so step or so we are here now.
Back.
So let's just go back Buist to pretend hits in do OK.
So this is the third student instance.
Now let's do another step in do.
And here we are.
So the object class got invoked.
So that's what has happened.
And we do step over.
So we are back in Student class.
Students take over step over OK so we.
So that's what is happening.
So there is an invisible super in waggish statement as we know.
And here is one more thing I want to point out as.
So here this is a statement.
So if we do step over it would execute this statement and move to the next statement.
But if had this been a method invocation then if we had step into it would go into the matter.
We know what we already know that.
But for this kind of statement which is not a method invocation statement it doesn't matter whether
it is step over or step into or even step into Would we have the same me.
It's just that if the statement involves him at that location then step in and do would really step
into that method.
OK so let's just step into the you see step into step into.
So that's what is happening here.
So there is no difference between step over and step into.
Now another thing I want to point as.
Let's say we came here to this particular statement and you just want to go back and do it go back in
time and you know or Buddha or de-bug once again into the beginning from the beginning of the matter
and that is all you need to do is just click on this.
Drop the frame and it would start again.
But the catch is that the ID variable got initialized 2003.
So the values are not reset.
It's just that the control goes back but the values the instance variable values are not initialized
or even the static variable values will not read or read initialized.
OK.
So let's just go do step over stick or stick or just of course the we're now ID would be 2004.
So that's the drop to frame on your JVM hostile supported in order for you to see these Eikon here.
So let's just do a step taken.
So here we are.
STUDENT 4 let's just take resume here.
So here we are in the for loop just took over.
Now another thing that we can do is here we have the name variable or the generated one.
You can also read said the value so the value is Jo-Anne.
Now let's say for example we want to see what happens if we change it to another.
OK so we can do that.
So you can just right click on Sid change value.
So from Joanne let's say you want to change it to null.
It's just a string.
So hit.
OK.
Now you can see that it is not a novel it's going to print.
Let's let's just step into print.
As you can see the print is not at all.
It's printing now here.
So it's just written soon it's just finished a..
Now one final thing I want to show is let's just go here.
So let's just say we want to get it.
I mean if we hit resume it's going to finish right.
Because there is no break point.
But let's say we want to stop here.
There is no break point but we still want to stop here at some point in the future.
So what we can do is just put your you know just going near that statement going to that line and just
hit Control are and you can see the control jumps to that particular statement and it exiguous everything
in between.
OK.
So we can do that even though there is no break statement and on what we will do is to control our.
So that's about it.
And let me just run this one more time resume.
So we are done.
Now here are the big points if you want remore all the brick ones at once.
You can click this icon here remore all break points.
So it says are are you sure.
Yes.
Now if you want to remove this you can also do directory more or terminated branches so there is one
more from some other session.
So let's just close this so you can have multiple debug sessions.
OK.
So that's about it.
I think those are all important things that we need to know about about debugging.
And we have blown that.
So what we learned is all the fundamental stuff now in the supplementary notes I will include a pointer
to a really good read you'll see it is that coward's debugging debugger at a very deep level.
Those rules are specific to debugging are not instructed by a person called Mark Baxter and it's really
good stuff.
OK so if you want to go into more details you have to do it you can look at those videos it's over one
hour long.
But what be covered here is definitely the basic stuff fundamental stuff and it should be more than
enough but you can also go and look check all those videos.
Not that debuggers are also used on Glan side to debug issues in Javascript.
So it's not just Java code.
You can also have a debugger or in the client side.
So Wondolowski a debugger I use extensively is cardless firebug.
And it can be installed in the browser and it works pretty much like Eclipse's a debugger.
In fact I think most debuggers would work in a similar way.
So that's about it.
And I hope you enjoyed it.